New blog post on Hardening Kubernetes Security with Istio Ambient Mode on Flat Networks (#17445)
istio/istio.io: content/en/blog/2026/istio-network-security-flat-networks-ambient-mode/index.md

---
title: "Hardening Kubernetes Security with Istio Ambient Mode on Flat Networks"
description: "How to use Istio Ambient mode to secure your flat on-prem network."

> publishdate: 2026-06-20

Reviewer: Remember to fix date when the PR is approved

attribution: "Harshwardhan Mehrotra - One2N"
keywords: [Istio, security, ambient, kubernetes, bare metal, on-prem]
---

If you've moved a workload off AWS and onto on-prem infrastructure, you've likely run into this: **the network isolation you got for free on the cloud does not exist on bare metal.**

On AWS, Security Groups and VPC boundaries enforce service boundaries quietly in the background. Most teams never have to think about it. On-prem, the network is flat by default. Your payment service, your internal admin panel, your logging agent, and your customer-facing API all sit in the same cluster with nothing between them at the network layer.

You can get that isolation back through firewall rules and network segmentation, but on most on-prem setups that means working through infra teams with their own change management cycles. When you are mid-migration and trying to move fast, that is a meaningful constraint.

> So on an EKS Hybrid deployment that we were running, we decided to solve this at the mesh layer instead. We already had Istio in the stack, and it gave us a way to enforce workload-level isolation without waiting on network-level changes. The security team reviewed the model and signed off, because the controls we built mapped directly to what they would have required from the firewall anyway. This [talk](https://one2n.io/talks/kubernetes-for-hybrid-cloud-environments---harshwardhan-mehrotra---60-kubernetes-pune-meetup) covers the broader EKS Hybrid setup if you want that context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, on an EKS Hybrid deployment that we were running, we decided to solve this at the mesh layer instead. We already had Istio in the stack, and it gave us a way to enforce workload-level isolation without waiting for network-level changes. The security team reviewed the model and signed off, because the controls we built mapped directly to what they would have required from the firewall anyway. This [talk](https://one2n.io/talks/kubernetes-for-hybrid-cloud-environments---harshwardhan-mehrotra---60-kubernetes-pune-meetup) covers the broader EKS Hybrid setup if you want that context.
```

{{< tip >}}
This post is about how we built that isolation layer, layer by layer, and what we learned doing it.
{{< /tip >}}

## Why Istio (even for small clusters)

You don't need a massive microservices architecture to benefit from Istio. Even in a small cluster, the mesh gives you three things that are hard to get any other way:

* **Zero-Trust Identity**: Instead of trusting a service because it has a certain IP address, you trust it because it holds a cryptographically verified certificate tied to its identity. An attacker who gets onto the network cannot fake that.
* **Transparent Encryption**: All traffic between services is encrypted automatically using mTLS (mutual TLS, meaning both sides verify each other), with no changes needed to your application code.
* **Deep Observability**: You get a live map of which services are talking to which, with no instrumentation required.

## Sidecar vs. Ambient: why we chose Ambient mode

There are two ways to run Istio. The traditional model injects a small proxy (called a sidecar) into every pod. Every service gets its own proxy, which handles encryption and policy enforcement for that service.

> We chose the newer approach:**Istio Ambient Mode**. Instead of a proxy per pod, Ambient runs a single shared component called ztunnel on each node. It handles the same job (encrypting traffic, enforcing identity) but does it at the node level rather than inside every individual pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We chose the newer approach:**Istio Ambient Mode**. Instead of a proxy per pod, Ambient runs a single shared component called ztunnel on each node. It handles the same job (encrypting traffic, enforcing identity) but operates strictly at the Layer 4 (L4) transport layer, running at the node level rather than inside every individual pod.
```

I think highlighting that Ztunnel operates at L4 is important because later you explain that L7 is handle with an extra component

| Feature | Sidecar Mode | Ambient Mode |
|---|---|---|
| **Deployment** | One proxy inside every pod | One shared component per node |
| **Operational Overhead** | High (restarts, extra memory per pod) | Low (transparent to pods) |
| **Encryption (mTLS)** | Handled by each pod's own proxy | Handled by the node-level ztunnel |
| **Advanced HTTP features (L7)** | Always available | Needs an extra component (Waypoint Proxy) |
| **Performance** | Medium | Lower overhead for basic security |

### What you give up with Ambient mode

Ambient mode is not a drop-in replacement for sidecars yet. The gaps worth knowing before you commit:

* **Advanced HTTP features (L7) need an extra component**: Things like header-based routing, retries, and per-request metrics are not handled by ztunnel. You need to deploy a Waypoint Proxy for these.

> * **Custom filters do not work on ztunnel**: If you are using custom WebAssembly plugins or the `EnvoyFilter` API today, those require a Waypoint Proxy too.

Reviewer: I think this can be improved a little:
```suggestion
* **Custom filters do not work on ztunnel**: if you want to run custom WebAssembly plugins or Lua scripts via the modern TrafficExtension API, those require a Waypoint Proxy. Because ztunnel operates strictly at Layer 4, it cannot process the Layer 7 application logic that most custom filters and plug-ins rely on.
```

wdyt?

Author: Yup this adds more context for the user

1. The ztunnel intercepts the DNS lookup before it goes out.
1. If we have declared `api.external.com` as an allowed external service (via a `ServiceEntry`), ztunnel returns a placeholder IP address. The service connects to that, and ztunnel routes the real connection through the Egress Gateway for inspection.
1. If we have not declared that address, ztunnel lets the DNS request through but the actual connection gets dropped by the kernel-level network rules (covered in the next layer).

![The Egress Flow with DNS Interception](./egress_flow.gif)
<p align="center"><em>Fig 1: The Egress Flow with DNS Interception</em></p>

To register an allowed external service and route it through the gateway:

{{< text yaml >}}
# Eg 3: Registering an external service and linking to the Egress Gateway
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1
kind: ServiceEntry
metadata:
  name: external-api
  namespace: production
  labels:
    istio.io/use-waypoint: production-egress-gateway # Explicitly binds SE to our gateway
spec:
hosts:
- api.external.com
ports:
  - number: 443
    name: https
    protocol: HTTPS
location: MESH_EXTERNAL

> resolution: DNS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1
kind: ServiceEntry
metadata:
  name: external-api
  namespace: production
  labels:
    istio.io/use-waypoint: production-egress-gateway # Explicitly binds SE to our gateway
spec:
  hosts:
    - api.external.com
  ports:
    - number: 443
      name: https
      protocol: HTTPS
  location: MESH_EXTERNAL
  resolution: DNS
```

Indent seems wrong. Please check this

{{< /text >}}

> The `istio.io/use-waypointlabel` is what tells ztunnel to send this traffic through the gateway instead of passing it through directly.

Reviewer: I think you can specify here what kind of egress gateway this is, because it's a waypoint proxy acting as egress, right? Maybe it can be something like this

```suggestion
The `istio.io/use-waypoint` label is what tells ztunnel to route this outbound traffic through our Egress Waypoint, which is simply a standard Waypoint Proxy acting as an egress gateway instead of letting it pass directly out to the internet.
```

Kubernetes has its own network rules (`NetworkPolicies`) that work at a lower level than Istio, enforced by the Linux kernel on each node. We set two rules for every namespace:

1. **Block all outbound traffic** except DNS lookups and the internal Istio communication port (15008). Regular services cannot reach the internet.
1. **Allow the Egress Gateway to reach the internet**. This is the only component that can.

{{< text yaml >}}
# Eg 4: Restricting pod egress to the Mesh and DNS only
kind: NetworkPolicy
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
metadata:
  name: deny-all-egress-except-mesh
  namespace: production
spec:
  podSelector: {} # Applies to all pods in the namespace
  policyTypes: ["Egress"]
egress:
  - to: # Allow DNS
      - namespaceSelector: {} # any namespace
    ports:
      - protocol: UDP
        port: 53
  - to: # Allow traffic to istio-system (for control plane/discovery)
      - namespaceSelector:
          matchLabels:
            kubernetes.io/metadata.name: istio-system
    ports: # Allow HBONE tunnel to Egress Gateway/Waypoint
      - protocol: TCP

>         port: 15008

Reviewer: ```suggestion
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: NetworkPolicy
metadata:
  name: deny-all-egress-except-mesh
  namespace: production
spec:
  podSelector: {} # Applies to all pods in the namespace
  policyTypes:
    - Egress
  egress:
    - to: # Allow DNS
        - namespaceSelector: {} # any namespace
      ports:
        - protocol: UDP
          port: 53
    - to: # Allow traffic to istio-system (for control plane/discovery)
        - namespaceSelector:
            matchLabels:
              kubernetes.io/metadata.name: istio-system
      ports: # Allow HBONE tunnel to Egress Gateway/Waypoint
        - protocol: TCP
          port: 15008
```

Reviewer: Fix indent in the yaml, please take a look

---
# Eg 5: Allowing the Egress Gateway to reach the internet
kind: NetworkPolicy
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
metadata:
  name: allow-egress-gateway-to-internet
  namespace: production
spec:
  podSelector:
    matchLabels:
      gateway.networking.k8s.io/gateway-name: production-egress-gateway
  policyTypes: ["Egress"]
egress:

>   - {} # Unrestricted egress for the gateway itself

Reviewer: ```suggestion
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: NetworkPolicy
metadata:
  name: allow-egress-gateway-to-internet
  namespace: production
spec:
  podSelector:
    matchLabels:
      gateway.networking.k8s.io/gateway-name: production-egress-gateway
  policyTypes: ["Egress"]
  egress:
    - {} # Unrestricted egress for the gateway itself
```

Reviewer: Check indent here also please

{{< /text >}}

## What we learned

> 1. **Start with the why**: We adopted Istio here not because it is interesting technology, but because the infrastructure could not give us the isolation we needed without months of back-and-forth. That framing matters when you are explaining the decision to a security team.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Focus on the business problem, not the tech**: We adopted Istio here not because it is interesting technology, but because the infrastructure could not give us the isolation we needed without months of back-and-forth. That framing matters when you are explaining the decision to a security team.
```

I think it can punch better at what you want to show as the main Why of using Istio

1. **Ambient mode is worth it, but go in with open eyes**: It removes a lot of operational overhead, but you will need the Waypoint Proxy for anything beyond basic traffic encryption, and VMs are not supported yet.

> 1. **Istio and Kubernetes network rules are not the same thing**: Istio works at the application layer. Kubernetes `NetworkPolicies` work at the network layer. You need both. Each catches things the other cannot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Istio and Kubernetes network rules are not the same thing**: Istio secures traffic based on workload identity at the transport and application layers. Kubernetes `NetworkPolicies` work at the network layer. You need both. Each catches things the other cannot.
```
